Rana Punja Bhil
The Bhil republics were the true claimants to the protection of Mewar. Prominent among these Bhils was Rana Punja Bhil. Due to the incomparable courage, indomitable bravery, and innate valor of Rana Punja, Mewar remained invincible.
Rana Punja was born into the family of Duda Solanki, the chieftain of Merpur (Kotada). His mother’s name was Kehribai. Following the death of his father at the young age of fifteen, Rana Punja was made the chieftain of Merpur. Due to his foresight, he soon became the King of Bhomat.
Alliance with Maharana Pratap
In the year 1576, when Mughal interference began in the state of Mewar, the Maharana sought the cooperation of Bhil Rana Punja. Considering it his duty, Punja Bhil stood with Rana Pratap. He decided to stand by Mewar with his entire force to confront the Mughals. At that time, Rana Punja promised the Maharana that he and all the Bhil warriors were determined to protect Mewar.
Maharana Pratap considered Rana Punja as his brother and conferred upon him the title of Rana. At that time, the Maharana created the State Emblem of Mewar, which features a Rajput on one side and Rana Punja Bhil on the other. This royal emblem still graces the Mewar City Palace today.
Heroism and Legacy
Impressed by Rana Punja’s bravery, the Maharana of Mewar made him the "pride of his turban" (Sartaj) and gave him a place on his own forehead. Such an example is perhaps not found anywhere else in all of India; this is the true identity of Mewar and the pride of the Bhil army. The Rajmata (Queen Mother) of Mewar tied a Rakhi to Rana Punja and made him her brother. Even today, the Rajput community refers to members of the Bhil community as brothers. This is a unique example of unity between the Rajput and Bhil citizens in social life.
In the Battle of Haldighati, Rana Punja threw all his strength into defending his state. His skill lay in the guerrilla warfare system, which he used to challenge the Mughal army. As soon as the Mughal army entered Mewar, they would tremble due to the Bhils' guerrilla tactics, never knowing from which tree or from where an arrow might strike. The credit for this goes entirely to Rana Punja Bhil’s army. History states that if the Battle of Haldighati remained indecisive, the credit goes to the courage and guerrilla warfare methods of the Bhil army.
The Sacrifice of Dudha
While remembering Rana Punja, one cannot forget Dudha, a Bhil boy from the hilly settlement of Punga, who sacrificed his life to bring bread to Maharana Pratap during adverse circumstances.
When his mother told him to go and give the bread to Maharana Pratap, Dudha set out with courage despite the siege by the Muslim (Mughal) army. When the soldiers became suspicious, they pursued Dudha and attacked him with a sword. Although wounded, Dudha kept running. Finally, he reached Maharana Pratap, gave him the bread, and attained martyrdom.
The ensuing dialogue with Maharana Pratap is deeply inspiring:
Dudha: "Maharana, mother has sent bread for you."
Rana Pratap: "Son, what was the need to put yourself in such danger for this?"
Dudha: "Provider of Food (Annadata), you are in crisis with your entire family. Mother says that if you wanted, you could have compromised with Akbar and lived in comfort. But you have made such a great sacrifice for religion and culture; compared to that, my sacrifice is nothing."
Times will change, but the strength and tales of these heroes will remain inscribed in golden letters in the pages of history. Saluting the bravery of Rana Punja Bhil, we say that your valor, prowess, and sacrifice will never be forgotten by the land of Mewar or the land of India.